---
date: 2017-06-01
title: An Introduction to Functional Programming in JavaScript
tags:
  - Functional Programming
  - Presentation
---

This is the talk I gave at the [JavaScript meetup in
Phoenix](https://www.meetup.com/Phoenix-JavaScript/events/240001605/). One the
othe largest programming meetups in the valley.

[Here are the slides to the
talk.](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1NQWmeYUGwjgCqlThwjpBWcYBbETTsx9rcFsQfu1H_Ao/edit?usp=sharing)

<iframe
src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1NQWmeYUGwjgCqlThwjpBWcYBbETTsx9rcFsQfu1H_Ao/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000"
frameborder="0" width="480" height="299" allowfullscreen="true"
mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe>

Here's some books that can help you get ramped up into the functional
programming paradigm *Introducing functional programming with Underscore.js* by
Michael Fogus. And for a more in depth look into functional patterns [*Professor
Frisbyâ€™s Mostly Adequate Guide to Functional
Programming*](https://github.com/MostlyAdequate/mostly-adequate-guide).

Some additional resources of people that have come to embrace the functional
programming concepts:

[John Carmack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Carmack) [on why and how
functional programming can help with game
development.](https://youtu.be/Uooh0Y9fC_M?t=1h17m40s).

[Richard Feldman](https://youtu.be/FV0DXNB94NE) found writing in Elm made
refactoring easier, improved productivity, and code quality.

[Paul Graham](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Graham_(computer_programmer))
[attributes his companyâ€™s success on using LISP for faster iterations and
quickly creating new features.](http://www.paulgraham.com/avg.html)

[WhatsApp scaled to millions with a very small
team.](https://www.quora.com/What-is-unique-about-WhatsApps-engineering-culture-that-let-it-scale-with-a-small-team)

### Talk Description

Functional programming is a programming-language paradigm that helps programmers
write better code that is easier to understand. As computers have become faster
many people are looking back at the advantages of functional programming and
incorporating the ideas into their products. Many JavaScript libraries and
frameworks have also been incorporating functional programming concepts; such as
Lodash, Ramda, React, and many more. Come and learn what is functional
programming; learn the history of functional programming in JavaScript; learn
the pros and cons of functional programming; and learn some core concepts of
functional programming that can improve the quality of your software.

Jon Nyman is full stack web developer who is passionate about the functional
paradigm of programming. He programmed in Node.js for about 8 months and now
spends most of his time writing C#, F#, and T-SQL.

