---
title: The High Costs of False Beliefs
draft: true
tags:
  - life lessons
---

My mother-in-law passed away over the Christmas break. She was sixty years
old.  Really young. Her grandchildren will not get to know her. Some are to
young to remember her by the time they are older. A few will remember her but
won't have more wonderful experiences with her.

How is it that she died so young? What it comes down to is that she had an
irrational fear of doctors and modern medicine. Why did she have have such an
irrational fear that it would lead her to die so young? It is complex. But here
is the basic story.

Her and her children would get ear aches and get sick often. She wondered
what could be done so her family wasn't sick all the time.  Her husband was
laid off from his position as a civil engineer, so they cut back expenses, one
of which was luxury food. When they gave up on some of these foods they
noticed that everyone didn't get as sick as they once did. This is when she
started learning more on how food affects people. It began a slow journey for
her family becoming more vegan in their food choices. It also started the
journey to learn more about alternative medicine. And it culminated in her
rejecting many parts of modern medicine, believing that diet and alternative
medicine can fix most ailments, and [that modern medicine
kills](http://www.naturodoc.com/library/public_health/doctors_cause_death.htm)
([via](https://sciencebasedmedicine.org/put-your-fears-in-perspective/)).

She had sleep apnea. She refused to go to a see a doctor about it despite many
of her loved ones and friends asking and suggesting that she go see a doctor.
She chose to try and fix it her own way with alternative methods. Over at
least a seven year time span she suffered from this condition and it took its
toll on her heart (along with a diet that wasn't perfect). If she had her
yearly visit with a doctor and listened to her doctor she most likely would
still be alive today.

We all have irrational ideas. Every one of us. We like to think that we are
rational beings and that others are wrong. It is hard for us to see our own
[cognitive biases](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_bias). Even when we
know about cognitive bias it can still be difficult to see past our biases. I
know that I think illogically all the time. Sometimes it's not that big of a
deal. But other times it can affect us profoundly. Even worse, it can affect
others in a highly negative way.

Coming from a [libertarian
perspective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Libertarianism) I believe I can see
irrationality in the political process that affects many people negatively.
Foreign wars that kill thousands of people every year, needlessly. Over
regulation that causes sky high medical costs and educational costs which also
[reduces much needed
innovation](https://regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/sites/regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/files/downloads/RegInsight_AMZM-regulation-and-Innv%26entrep-literature-review120815.pdf)
([see
also](https://mises.org/library/government-regulation-and-economic-stagnation)).

I think, in part, that I adhere more to the libertarian view because I know
that I am fundamentally flawed and so are others. It is the human condition.
That is why it is so important that people be free to come up with ideas to
make a better tomorrow. When we have a top down structure that tells what
people can or cannot do it hampers the creative process to come up with
solutions for societal ills or even for societal innovations.

I hear sometimes in the software community how people think that software
developers should be more regulated. They think that by regulating the
software industry at least in part that we will manage to produce better code
(even though they will be the same people developing software as before).
Maybe that is true. Maybe it would be good for a certain segment of software
development. But it is impossible to know. [We need to be able to see the
whole picture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parable_of_the_broken_window).
The cost would probably be too high and slow the pace of innovation, which, in
the end could cost more lives then the lives that might be saved.

Although I believe that irrationality is a wonderful part of the human
experience. I think it is important for all of us to try and see reality for
what it is. I also think it is important for all of us to love, or at least
tolerate, each other more. It doesn't mean that we can't discuss new ideas or
think each other is wrong. It does mean that we need to recognize that more
often than not that we might be wrong. [So, we shouldn't dictate what each
other ought to do through violent
means](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monopoly_on_violence). Is my dream of a
peaceful world a fantasy? I don't know. But I like to think it would be better
than we have now. Maybe it would have saved my mother-in-law if doctors hadn't
been so over regulated that they didn't have the time or inclination to sit
down with her and explain how diet can affect our health. Maybe then she
wouldn't have mistrusted doctors so much that she refused any medical
intervention. Or maybe not. It's impossible to know.

